***** File ACKNWLDG.TXT                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                          ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                    
        (A History of the Final Steps of IHW CD-ROM Production)               
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     By now the story of the International Halley Watch (IHW) is well enough  
known that I need not attempt any recounting of its entire history as far as  
acknowledgements are concerned. Besides, that is not my place:  Ray L. Newburn
and Juergen Rahe, the IHW Co-Leaders, have already described in print (the    
so-called "IHW Summary Volume") much of what has transpired since the         
late-1970s and early-1980s in the world of IHW.                               
                                                                              
     These Acknowledgements are concerned with the final steps of CD-ROM      
preparation and production, steps which were largely taken by a handful of    
individuals at the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, working in collaboration 
with the IHW Lead Center (LC) at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL).  Let    
those who are considering the assembly of a CD-ROM archive of this size (20+  
volumes of data) be aware of this truth, which we have learned empirically:   
depending on the nature of the data and on the diversity of data types, the   
"job"--defined here as all efforts leading to the shipment of pre-mastered    
tapes to a CD-ROM mastering vendor--may not be close to completion once all   
the data have been received from the outside world.  That was certainly the   
case in our situation.                                                        
                                                                              
     The simple truth is that if the goal is to create a useful archive, one  
that is replete with searchable indices, tables of interest, software, and    
lucid documentation, and, moreover, one which possesses a useful and efficient
directory layout (or "CD tree"), then a very large amount of effort is        
required.  It probably comes as no surprise to the reader that many revisions 
of plan are encountered along the way, as a scheme which once seemed promising
now looks like the course NOT to follow.                                      
                                                                              
    A point which cannot be emphasized enough is that for CD-ROMs, like IHW's,
which contain a very large number of files and whose directories contain many 
types of data originally resident on so many different magnetic tapes, the    
data need to reside on a "mass storage system" immediately prior to ingestion 
into the "pre-mastering workstation" (a device which converts data and files  
to a format which a CD-ROM mastering vendor can use).  In other words:        
transfer the original tapes into mass storage and organize the data there,    
either writing output tapes or streaming the data directly to the workstation 
by electronic means.  One advantage of this approach is that it is readily    
adaptable to new technologies, such as 8mm exabyte tape and FTP file transfer.
The other approach of creating multiply-interleaved magnetic tapes directly   
from many input tapes (i.e., without intermediate storage) is not only        
excessively time-consuming, but it is more error prone and less adaptable to  
repeat attempts if something goes wrong the first time.                       
                                                                              
-------------------                                                           
                                                                              
     That NASA/GSFC became so involved in these last steps of IHW archive     
production came about as a direct result of the points raised in the last two 
paragraphs.  The brief history is this.  During 1986-89, the IHW Large-Scale  
Phenomena (L-SP) Discipline, the digital data portion of which resided at     
NASA/GSFC, was engaged in sending standardized, FITS-formatted data to the JPL
LC (as were all the IHW Discipline Teams).  However, because of the enormous  
disparity between the average file size for L-SP data (approx. 15 Mb) and     
those of the other IHW Disciplines, it was decided in late-1987 that L-SP's   
contribution to the IHW CD-ROM archive would reside on dedicated discs, and,  
further, that in order to reduce the number of discs required the L-SP data   
would be compressed by a factor of not less than two-to-one.  As a result of  
follow-on studies conducted by Archibald ("Archie") Warnock III and Barbara B.
Pfarr, both of STX Corp. and serving, respectively, as Senior Software        
Specialist and Archive Manager for the L-SP Discipline Specialist Team, it was
decided that "previous pixel compression" was not only conceptually simple to 
end users but would yield 2:1 compression.  It became the technique of choice.
                                                                              
     A development parallel to these decisions about L-SP data was one        
concerning the manner in which the IHW data were to be pre-mastered for       
CD-ROM. Specifically, an agreement was reached between the IHW and NASA/GSFC's
National Space Science Data Center (NSSDC) which allowed IHW's use of the     
NSSDC's pre-mastering workstation for the entire set of CD-ROMs.  There were  
several factors at work here, among them the obvious desirability from a      
management/cost viewpoint of having a government facility (NASA/GSFC-NSSDC)   
directly involved in the pre-mastering.  Not the least of the factors,        
however, was the desire to continue Dr. Edwin J. Grayzeck's (then of          
Interferometrics, Inc., and under contract to the NSSDC) connection with the  
IHW CD-ROMs.  Ed had, for several years, been on my L-SP Discipline Specialist
Team, and with time he had "branched out" into the larger arena of IHW CD-ROM 
production.  The IHW, to which Ed had served as a consultant for CD-ROM work, 
knew of his worth to project.  Indeed, many of us in the Discipline Specialist
community received our "CD-ROM education" from Ed as a result of talks he gave
at IHW meetings (Archie Warnock also possessed and communicated valuable      
CD-ROM expertise to the IHW).                                                 
                                                                              
     Returning to the subject of the L-SP data, it was felt that, due to the  
very unique nature of those data, the compression should take place at        
NASA/GSFC following the completion of the microdensitometry effort.  In other 
words, this very discipline-specific task should be done at the discipline    
level.  We felt that this was "one more thing" that should NOT be added to    
Mikael Aronsson (JPL/LC) and the LC's burden.  Besides, our manner of data    
shipment to Mikael was one (uncompressed) image per magnetic tape, which had  
resulted in over 1,500 tapes shipped between 1986 and 1989.  To ask Mikael,   
who did not have access to a mass storage platform, to run our compression    
code on files contained on 1,500 separate tapes, seemed "cruel and unusual."  
We offered to do the job at GSFC and to do whatever was necessary to get the  
files to Ed Grayzeck at NSSDC's pre-mastering workstation.                    
                                                                              
     It was at this point--the end of 1988 and the first half of 1989--that   
NASA/GSFC/L-SP's Dr. Daniel A. Klinglesmith III, working closely with John M. 
Bogert III (also of NASA/GSFC), made unique contributions to the L-SP effort  
which were to have great value later on with the entire IHW dataset.  Dan and 
John transferred the entire set of uncompressed L-SP imagery to NASA/GSFC's   
IBM/3081 mass storage system (over 20 gigabytes of data), compressed the data 
there, then wrote the compressed datafiles to magnetic output tapes in        
chronological order (of observation date/time) and shipped them across GSFC to
Ed.  In the process of setting up this "system," John and Dan also created    
software which generated a set of on-line catalogs listing:  every datafile, a
subset of the more important FITS keywords associated with each, and the      
location of each file within the IBM "disk farm."                             
                                                                              
     At this point in the second half of 1989 we were, theoretically, ready to
pre-master all 18 volumes of L-SP compressed images, but it was important to  
create a "test disc" to ascertain, not only if the data preparation, disc     
layout, and pre-mastering had been done correctly and intelligently, but also 
what type of CD-ROM "performance" could be expected of a high-quality         
mastering vendor. Toward this end, we (Ed, Dan, John, Archie, and I) created a
"Halley Armada Test Disc" containing 80 compressed L-SP images spanning 1986  
March 6-14 (Armada Week). The mastering vendor for this "one shot" venture was
known to be at the top of the CD-ROM profession, and extensive testing of the 
resulting disc by us and an outside testing company confirmed the disc's high 
quality (low block linear error rates, etc.).  As important, we liked the     
layout of the disc and decided to go forward with most of its features for the
full set of 18 L-SP discs.  ["Armada" was actually the second IHW test disc:  
the first one had been a disc containing IHW data on comet P/Giacobini-Zinner.
The G-Z test disc--its history and purpose--is discussed more fully in the    
VOLINFO.TXT text file in the DOCUMENT directory].                             
                                                                              
     [Something of an aside, perhaps, but I should nonetheless state that the 
drawing-up of technical specifications, the writing of a "Request for         
Proposal" (RFP), the actual selection of a CD-ROM mastering vendor, and the   
writing of the Contract, were all aspects of the IHW CD-ROM work which        
occurred at NASA/GSFC.  By agreement between Ray Newburn and me, I was in     
charge of performing these tasks, including the judging of proposals and the  
awarding of the Contract (out of funds shipped from JPL to NASA/GSFC).  My    
primary interaction in all of this was with the NASA/GSFC Procurement Office, 
and it is a pleasure to thank Ms. Cindy Tart; she was very patient with me    
(explaining the vagaries of government procurement) and was as interested as  
the IHW in securing the services of an excellent CD-ROM vendor.  We were      
strongly guided by the high performance characteristics of the Armada Test    
Disc.]                                                                        
                                                                              
-------------------                                                           
                                                                              
     Production of the 18 L-SP compressed image discs followed in fairly      
routine order, Ed Grayzeck and an assistant doing the actual pre-mastering    
from tapes created by Dan Klinglesmith and John Bogert.                       
                                                                              
     In the meantime, Mikael Aronsson at the JPL LC was working on the myriad 
of tasks required for preparing the datafiles of the other IHW Disciplines,   
datafiles which would reside on a shorter series of 5 "mixed discs."  The idea
was that Ed Grayzeck would receive from Mikael chronologically-sorted magnetic
tapes on which six of the IHW Disciplines' data would reside interleaved; this
would include uncompressed, subsampled "browse versions" of the L-SP images   
which we had shipped Mikael.  Three of the IHW Disciplines were to have their 
data deposited on CD-ROM in different directory levels, and they could be     
separately treated.  The tricky question was:  how does one interleave over   
16,000 datafiles from 6 sets of input tapes (one set per Discipline) without  
some form of mass storage?  The answer, of course, is that if enough tape     
drives are available and if enough human intervention time is committed (for  
tape mounts, monitoring/correction of media errors, tape drive breakdowns,    
etc.), it can be done.                                                        
                                                                              
     At NASA/GSFC, we were concerned about the huge number of tasks which     
confronted the JPL LC (especially Mikael).  The largest of these, undoubtedly,
was the creation of interleaved datatapes in a many-tapes-to-tape operation   
involving about 100 input tapes.  As a result of our L-SP work, which included
all the tasks from initial archiving to actual disc production, we knew that  
the mass storage techniques developed by Dan and John were very powerful when 
applied to datasets like IHW's.  I made an appeal to Ray Newburn, which was   
accepted, to have Mikael ship us the ENTIRE set of IHW data for ingestion into
the NASA/GSFC IBM/3081 "mass store."  In other words, the final steps of data 
preparation would take place at NASA/GSFC.  It is important to state, however,
that this transfer allowed Mikael to concentrate on many other tasks such as  
index construction, standardizing and re-formatting of Discipline Appendix    
files, etc.                                                                   
                                                                              
-------------------                                                           
                                                                              
     Once the entire IHW dataset had been transferred and was on-line at      
NASA/GSFC, a tripartite decision was made in late-1990--by NASA/GSFC, JPL, and
the Small Bodies Node (SBN) of the Planetary Data System (PDS)--to create a   
third IHW test disc, this one containing data from the entire IHW in much the 
same structure as envisioned for the so-called "mixed discs" [Michael F.      
A'Hearn is Node Manager of the SBN/PDS, and was a Discipline Specialist for   
IHW].  The emphasis here was not at all on testing mastering quality (the     
Contract having already been awarded), but on scrutinizing the characteristics
of disc design and layout, these being, in contrast to the L-SP discs,        
extremely complicated discs.  Further, there was the hope that any systematic 
problems with subsets of data might surface in disc review and be correctable 
before the final discs were made.  In addition (and finally), this disc would 
test our ability to transfer files electronically to the pre-mastering        
workstation via FTP (the Armada Disc was assembled from output tapes written  
off the IBM mass storage device).  The plan was not just to examine the disc  
ourselves, but to distribute copies to a handful (5-10) of outside reviewers. 
Also sent out for review was the earlier L-SP "Armada Week" test disc.        
                                                                              
     Due to the exigencies of time, it was not possible to fabricate the "IHW 
Test Disc" exactly according to the mixed disc design.  For example, PDS      
labels were not included in this second test disc, and the documentation and  
index tables were far from complete.  Although our reviewers did point out    
these deficiencies to us, and had, in some cases, complaints about our        
decision to split off FITS headers from the data, they generally were quite   
favorable in their remarks about the test discs.  It is a pleasure now to     
thank the following individuals, our "outside peer review panel":  Drs. Anita 
Cochran (Univ. of Texas-Austin), Mike DiSanti and Susan Hoban (NASA/GSFC),    
Michel Festou (Observatoire de Besancon), Barry Lutz and David Schleicher     
(Lowell Observatory), Karen Meech (Univ. of Hawaii), and Al Schultz and Wayne 
Kinzel (Space Telescope Inst.).  Disc reviews within the IHW community were   
performed by M. A'Hearn, M. Aronsson, E. Grayzeck, D. Klinglesmith, R.        
Newburn, M. Niedner, and A. Warnock.                                          
                                                                              
-------------------                                                           
                                                                              
     This brings the story nearly up-to-date (i.e., October 1991).  In the    
last 12 months a great deal of work has been expended at NASA/GSFC (in        
collaboration with the JPL LC) in:                                            
                                                                              
   o managing an IBM on-line archive consisting of (approx. 3x) 37,700        
      datafiles (the FITS headers and PDS labels are distinct files separate  
      from the data; "approx. 3x" because some files are "dataless",          
      consisting of only headers and labels);                                 
   o reviewing and revising the layout, or "CD tree," of the mixed discs;     
   o writing software to analyze the temporal distribution of files across    
      IHW disciplines, and creating CD-ROM data subdirectories of time widths 
      which satisfy our chosen maximum number of files per directory, 256;    
   o creating an intermediate "staging area" out of disk space on the         
      Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics' (LASP) VAX cluster, in order
      to build the contents of individual CD-ROMs (in other words, the        
      electronic data flow was:  IBM--VAX--workstation);                      
   o responding to calls by the Discipline Specialists for error correction of
      headers and data (hundreds of files across several of the disciplines), 
      made possible by the headers/data being "on-line";                      
   o creating searchable, delimited tables and indices from on-line headers   
      and data;                                                               
   o generating PDS labels for all datafiles;                                 
   o writing/editing of documentation to allow the archive user to understand 
      the disc contents and layout; and                                       
   o frequent checking of procedures and products.                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     The above should be considered a partial list of the activities which    
occurred even after the IHW data were deposited on the IBM mass store in the  
late-summer of 1990.  If it is appropriate to single out a particular         
individual within the last 8-12 months, then that person surely is Dan        
Klinglesmith, who has been extremely active in all phases of the work.  This  
is not to diminish anyone else, however:  we've all been very busy and are    
eager to move on to other things!  I have truly lost track of the number of   
IHW "planning sessions" attended by Dan, Ed, Archie, and me, and I'm equally  
hazy about the number of e-mail messages swapped back and forth (it's LARGE,  
and includes those sent by Mikael Aronsson, Ray Newburn, and Mike A'Hearn). On
it goes....                                                                   
                                                                              
     We are nearing the end now, however.  Pre-mastering of the mixed discs   
will start in earnest in a matter of weeks at most, and should be completed in
several months.  Data preparation for the third series of IHW CD-ROMs, that of
the "Space Data", is getting underway at the SBN/PDS, University of Maryland, 
under the direction of Ed Grayzeck and Mike A'Hearn.                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
Malcolm B. Niedner, Jr.                                                       
IHW Discipline Specialist for                                                 
  Large-Scale Phenomena                                                       
Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics                                    
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center                                              
Greenbelt, MD 20771   USA                                                     
                                                                              
October 2, 1991                                                               
